Add some common FAQ. (#9073)
ollama/ollama: docs/faq.md

How much the cache quantization impacts the model's response quality will depend on the model and the task.  Models that have a high GQA count (e.g. Qwen2) may see a larger impact on precision from quantization than models with a low GQA count.

You may need to experiment with different quantization types to find the best balance between memory usage and quality.

> ## How can I prevent OOMs?
> 
> Memory calculations depend on the architecture of the model and sometimes it's not correct.  This can lead to the runner terminating from an OOM.  This may be mitigated by one or more of the following:
> 
> 1. Set [`OLLAMA_GPU_OVERHEAD`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/5f8051180e3b9aeafc153f6b5056e7358a939c88/envconfig/config.go#L237) to give llama.cpp a buffer to grow in to (eg, `OLLAMA_GPU_OVERHEAD=536870912` to reserve 512M).  The exact value depends on model/GPU.
> 2. Enable flash attention by setting [`OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION=1`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/5f8051180e3b9aeafc153f6b5056e7358a939c88/envconfig/config.go#L236) in the server environment.  Flash attention is a more efficient use of memory and may reduce memory pressure.  See above.
> 3. Reduce the number layers that ollama thinks it can offload to the GPU, see [here](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/issues/6950#issuecomment-2373663650).
> 4. In Linux, set `GGML_CUDA_ENABLE_UNIFIED_MEMORY=1`.  This will allow the GPU to offload to CPU memory if VRAM is exhausted.  This is only useful for small amounts of memory as there is a [performance penalty](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/issues/7584#issuecomment-2466715900).  However, in the case where the goal is to reduce OOMs, the amount offloaded will be small and the impact minimal. 
> 5. Set [`OLLAMA_NUM_PARALLEL`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/a4f69a0191b304c204ef074ccd6523f121bfddfe/envconfig/config.go#L249) to 1.
> 6. Using a smaller context buffer by reducing [`num_ctx`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/a4f69a0191b304c204ef074ccd6523f121bfddfe/docs/modelfile.md#valid-parameters-and-values:~:text=mirostat_tau%205.0-,num_ctx,-Sets%20the%20size).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Preventing Out of Memory (OOM) Errors

Ollama is designed to automatically manage memory usage and prevent out-of-memory errors. However, in some cases, these errors might still occur. Here are solutions to help prevent these crashes:

## Basic Solutions

1. Decrease Context Size
   - [Lower the `num_ctx` parameter](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/a4f69a0191b304c204ef074ccd6523f121bfddfe/docs/modelfile.md#valid-parameters-and-values:~:text=mirostat_tau%205.0-,num_ctx,-Sets%20the%20size)
   - This reduces how much text the model can process at once
   - Results in lower memory usage

2. Limit GPU Layer Usage
   - [Reduce the number of model layers that run on your GPU](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/issues/6950#issuecomment-2373663650).
   - This helps balance the workload between GPU and CPU

## Advanced Solutions

For users who need additional control, the following environment variables can be configured:

- [`OLLAMA_GPU_OVERHEAD`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/5f8051180e3b9aeafc153f6b5056e7358a939c88/envconfig/config.go#L237): Reserves additional GPU memory (e.g., for 512MB buffer)
- [`OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/5f8051180e3b9aeafc153f6b5056e7358a939c88/envconfig/config.go#L236): Enables more efficient memory usage
- `GGML_CUDA_ENABLE_UNIFIED_MEMORY`: Allows GPU to use CPU memory (Linux only)
- [`OLLAMA_NUM_PARALLEL`](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/a4f69a0191b304c204ef074ccd6523f121bfddfe/envconfig/config.go#L249): Controls parallel processing

Note: Environment variable support may vary depending on your setup and system configuration.
```

## How can I set the size of the context buffer?

The size can be set in an API call (`"options":{"num_ctx":xxx}}`), in the ollama CLI (`/set parameter num_ctx xxx`), or configured in the model.  When using the OpenAI API compatability endpoint, setting the context size is not currently supported so it must be configured in the model.

There are two ways to configure the context size in a model.  First, use the `/save` command in the ollama CLI:
```console
ollama run model-with-normal-context
>>> /set parameter num_ctx 4096
>>> /save model-with-4096-context
>>> /bye
```
Second, create a new Modelfile:
```console
ollama show --modelfile model-with-normal-context > Modelfile
echo PARAMETER num_ctx 4096 > Modelfile
ollama create model-with-4096-context
```
After the model has been created, use it in the normal way:
```console
curl localhost:11434/api/generate -d "{\"model\":\"model-with-4096-context\",\"prompt\":\"why is the sky blue?\"}"
```
```console
ollama run model-with-4096-context
```

> If the model is large, the second approach above can cause a lot of disk activity as ollama loads the GGUF file.  This can be prevented by editing the Modelfile, uncommenting the first `FROM` statement and commenting the second `FROM` statement.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow this part, this is suggesting not using a new file but a model which Ollama has already downloaded?

## Why does the runner use 4 times the context buffer I configured?

Ollama can do parallel completions, controlled by `OLLAMA_NUM_PARALLEL`.  If unset, the default is 4 (or 1 if your system has only a small amount of free RAM).  Each completion instance has its own context buffer, size given by `num_ctx`.  The value of `ctx-size` on the runner command line or the value `n_ctx` in the logs is the total context buffer that is allocated, `OLLAMA_NUM_PARALLEL` * `num_ctx`.

## What is K-shift and why did it kill ollama?

> When the context buffer fills up during completion, the inference engine wants to shift the buffer to make room for new tokens.  Some model architectures, notably Deepseek, do not support this feature and the runner will exit with an error.  To prevent this, the context buffer (`num_ctx`) needs to be sized such that it can contain both input tokens and output tokens.  To prevent the completion from generating more output tokens than expected, `num_predict` should be set.  For example, if the model is expected to received up to 10,000 tokens and generate no more than 5,000 tokens in response, `num_ctx` is set to 15,000 and `num_predict` to 5,000.  These parameters can be set in the `options` field of an API call, or configured directly in the model.

Reviewer: I'd call this k-shift feature a bug, I'll poke Jesse to take a look at the issue. I'd rather fix it than document it if possible.
